<html>
  <head>
    <title>Conservative Liberal Democrat coalition negotiations Agreements reached</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    
<h1 id="conservative_liberal_democrat_coalition_negotiations_agreements_reached">Conservative Liberal Democrat coalition negotiations Agreements reached</h1>

<h2 id="11_may_2010">11 May 2010</h2>

<p>This document sets out agreements reached between the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats on a 
range of issues. These are the issues that needed to be resolved between us in order for us to work 
together as a strong and stable government. It will be followed in due course by a final Coalition 
Agreement, covering the full range of policy and including foreign, defence and domestic policy 
issues not covered in this document.  </p>

<h2 id="1_deficit_reduction">1. Deficit Reduction</h2>

<p>The parties agree that deficit reduction and continuing to ensure economic recovery is the most 
urgent issue facing Britain. We have therefore agreed that there will need to be: </p>

<ul>
<li>a significantly accelerated reduction in the structural deficit over the course of a Parliament, 
with the main burden of deficit reduction borne by reduced spending rather than increased taxes; </li>
<li>arrangements that will protect those on low incomes from the effect of public sector pay 
constraint and other spending constraints; and </li>
<li>protection of jobs by stopping Labour’s proposed jobs tax. 
The parties agree that a plan for deficit reduction should be set out in an emergency budget within 
50 days of the signing of any agreement; the parties note that the credibility of a plan on deficit 
reduction depends on its long-term deliverability, not just the depth of immediate cuts. New 
forecasts of growth and borrowing should be made by an independent Office for Budget 
Responsibility for this emergency budget. 
The parties agree that modest cuts of £6 billion to non-front line services can be made within the 
financial year 2010-11, subject to advice from the Treasury and the Bank of England on their 
feasibility and advisability. Some proportion of these savings can be used to support jobs, for 
example through the cancelling of some backdated demands for business rates. Other policies upon 
which we are agreed will further support job creation and green investment, such as work 
programmes for the unemployed and a green deal for energy efficiency investment. 
The parties agree that reductions can be made to the Child Trust Fund and tax credits for higher 
earners. </li>
</ul>

<h2 id="2_spending_review_nhs_schools_and_a_fairer_society">2. Spending Review – NHS, Schools and a Fairer Society</h2>

<p>The parties agree that a full Spending Review should be held, reporting this Autumn, following a 
fully consultative process involving all tiers of government and the private sector.  </p>

<p>The parties agree that funding for the NHS should increase in real terms in each year of the 
Parliament, while recognising the impact this decision would have on other departments. The target 
of spending 0.7% of GNI on overseas aid will also remain in place. </p>

<p>We will fund a significant premium for disadvantaged pupils from outside the schools budget by 
reductions in spending elsewhere. </p>

<p>The parties commit to holding a full Strategic Security and Defence Review alongside the Spending 
Review with strong involvement of the Treasury. </p>

<p>The Government will be committed to the maintenance of Britain’s nuclear deterrent, and have 
agreed that the renewal of Trident should be scrutinised to ensure value for money. Liberal 
Democrats will continue to make the case for alternatives.  We will immediately play a strong role 
in the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference, and press for continued progress on 
multilateral disarmament. </p>

<p>The parties commit to establishing an independent commission to review the long term affordability 
of public sector pensions, while protecting accrued rights. 
We will restore the earnings link for the basic state pension from April 2011 with a “triple 
guarantee” that pensions are raised by the higher of earnings, prices or 2.5%, as proposed by the 
Liberal Democrats.  </p>

<h2 id="3_tax_measures">3. Tax Measures</h2>

<p>The parties agree that the personal allowance for income tax should be increased in order to help 
lower and middle income earners. We agree to announce in the first Budget a substantial increase in 
the personal allowance from April 2011, with the benefits focused on those with lower and middle 
incomes. This will be funded with the money that would have been used to pay for the increase in 
Employee National Insurance thresholds proposed by the Conservatives, as well as revenues from 
increases in Capital Gains Tax rates for non-business assets as described below. The increase in 
Employer National Insurance thresholds proposed by the Conservatives will go ahead in order to 
stop Labour’s jobs tax. </p>

<p>We also agree to a longer term policy objective of further increasing the 
personal allowance to £10,000, making further real terms steps each year towards this objective. 
We agree that this should take priority over other tax cuts, including cuts to Inheritance Tax. We 
also agree that provision will be made for Liberal Democrat MPs to abstain on budget resolutions to 
introduce transferable tax allowances for married couples without prejudice to this coalition 
agreement. </p>

<p>The parties agree that a switch should be made to a per-plane, rather than per-passenger duty; a 
proportion of any increased revenues over time will be used to help fund increases in the personal 
allowance. </p>

<p>We further agree to seek a detailed agreement on taxing non-business capital gains at rates similar 
or close to those applied to income, with generous exemptions for entrepreneurial business 
activities.  </p>

<p>The parties agree that tackling tax avoidance is essential for the new government, and that all efforts 
will be made to do so, including detailed development of Liberal Democrat proposals. </p>

<h2 id="4_banking_reform">4. Banking Reform</h2>

<p>The parties agree that reform to the banking system is essential to avoid a repeat of Labour’s 
financial crisis, to promote a competitive economy, to sustain the recovery and to protect and 
sustain jobs. </p>

<p>We agree that a banking levy will be introduced. We will seek a detailed agreement on 
implementation.  </p>

<p>We agree to bring forward detailed proposals for robust action to tackle unacceptable bonuses in the 
financial services sector; in developing these proposals, we will ensure they are effective in 
reducing risk. </p>

<p>We agree to bring forward detailed proposals to foster diversity, promote mutuals and create a more 
competitive banking industry. </p>

<p>We agree that ensuring the flow of credit to viable SMEs is essential for supporting growth and 
should be a core priority for a new government, and we will work together to develop effective 
proposals to do so. This will include consideration of both a major loan guarantee scheme and the 
use of net lending targets for the nationalised banks.  </p>

<p>The parties wish to reduce systemic risk in the banking system and will establish an independent 
commission to investigate the complex issue of separating retail and investment banking in a 
sustainable way; while recognising that this would take time to get right, the commission will be 
given an initial time frame of one year to report. </p>

<p>The parties agree that the regulatory system needs reform to avoid a repeat of Labour’s financial 
crisis. We agree to bring forward proposals to give the Bank of England control of macro-prudential 
regulation and oversight of micro-prudential regulation. </p>

<p>The parties also agree to rule out joining the European Single Currency during the duration of this 
agreement. </p>

<h2 id="5_immigration">5.  Immigration</h2>

<p>We have agreed that there should be an annual limit on the number of non-EU economic migrants 
admitted into the UK to live and work. We will consider jointly the mechanism for implementing 
the limit. We will end the detention of children for immigration purposes. </p>

<h2 id="6_political_reform">6. Political Reform</h2>

<p>The parties agree to the establishment of five year fixed-term parliaments. A Conservative-Liberal 
Democrat coalition government will put a binding motion before the House of Commons in the first 
days following this agreement stating that the next general election will be held on the first 
Thursday of May 2015. Following this motion, legislation will be brought forward to make 
provision for fixed term parliaments of five years.  This legislation will also provide for dissolution 
if 55% or more of the House votes in favour. </p>

<p>The parties will bring forward a Referendum Bill on electoral reform, which includes provision for 
the introduction of the Alternative Vote in the event of a positive result in the referendum, as well 
as for the creation of fewer and more equal sized constituencies. Both parties will whip their 
Parliamentary Parties in both Houses to support a simple majority referendum on the Alternative 
Vote, without prejudice to the positions parties will take during such a referendum.  </p>

<p>The parties will bring forward early legislation to introduce a power of recall, allowing voters to 
force a by-election where an MP was found to have engaged in serious wrongdoing and having had 
a petition calling for a by-election signed by 10% of his or her constituents. </p>

<p>We agree to establish a committee to bring forward proposals for a wholly or mainly elected upper 
chamber on the basis of proportional representation.  The committee will come forward with a draft 
motions by December 2010. It is likely that this bill will advocate single long terms of office. It is also likely there will be a grandfathering system for current Peers. In the interim, Lords 
appointments will be made with the objective of creating a second chamber reflective of the share 
of the vote secured by the political parties in the last general election. </p>

<p>The parties will bring forward the proposals of the Wright Committee for reform to the House of 
Commons in full – starting with the proposed committee for management of programmed business 
and including government business within its scope by the third year of the Parliament. 
The parties agree to reduce electoral fraud by speeding up the implementation of individual voter 
registration. </p>

<p>We have agreed to establish a commission to consider the ‘West Lothian question’. <br>
The parties agree to the implementation of the Calman Commission proposals and the offer of a 
referendum on further Welsh devolution.  </p>

<p>The parties will tackle lobbying through introducing a statutory register of lobbyists. We also agree 
to pursue a detailed agreement on limiting donations and reforming party funding in order to 
remove big money from politics. </p>

<p>The parties will promote the radical devolution of power and greater financial autonomy to local 
government and community groups. This will include a full review of local government finance. </p>

<h2 id="7_pensions_and_welfare">7. Pensions and Welfare</h2>

<p>The parties agree to phase out the default retirement age and hold a review to set the date at which 
the state pension age starts to rise to 66, although it will not be sooner than 2016 for men and 2020 
for women. We agree to end the rules requiring compulsory annuitisation at 75. </p>

<p>We agree to implement the Parliamentary and Health Ombudsman’s recommendation to make fair 
and transparent payments to Equitable Life policy holders, through an independent payment 
scheme, for their relative loss as a consequence of regulatory failure. </p>

<p>The parties agree to end all existing welfare to work programmes and to create a single welfare to 
work programme to help all unemployed people get back into work. </p>

<p>We agree that Jobseeker’s Allowance claimants facing the most significant barriers to work should 
be referred to the aforementioned newly created welfare to work programme immediately, not after 
12 months as is currently the case. We agree that Jobseeker’s Allowance claimants aged under 25 
should be referred to the programme after a maximum of six months. </p>

<p>The parties agree to realign contracts with welfare to work service providers to reflect more closely 
the results they achieve in getting people back into work. </p>

<p>We agree that the funding mechanism used by government to finance welfare to work programmes 
should be reformed to reflect the fact that initial investment delivers later savings in lower benefit 
expenditure. </p>

<p>We agree that receipt of benefits for those able to work should be conditional on the willingness to 
work. </p>

<h2 id="8_education">8. Education</h2>

<h3 id="schools">Schools</h3>

<p>We agree to promote the reform of schools in order to ensure: </p>

<ul>
<li>that new providers can enter the state school system in response to parental demand; </li>
<li>that all schools have greater freedom over curriculum; and, </li>
<li>that all schools are held properly accountable. </li>
</ul>

<h3 id="higher_education">Higher education</h3>

<p>We await Lord Browne’s final report into higher education funding, and will judge its proposals 
against the need to: </p>

<ul>
<li>increase social mobility; </li>
<li>take into account the impact on student debt; </li>
<li>ensure a properly funded university sector; </li>
<li>improve the quality of teaching; </li>
<li>advance scholarship; and, </li>
<li>attract a higher proportion of students from disadvantaged backgrounds. </li>
</ul>

<p>If the response of the Government to Lord Browne’s report is one that Liberal Democrats cannot 
accept, then arrangements will be made to enable Liberal Democrat MPs to abstain in any vote. </p>

<h2 id="9_relations_with_the_eu">9. Relations with the EU</h2>

<p>We agree that the British Government will be a positive participant in the European Union, playing 
a strong and positive role with our partners, with the goal of ensuring that all the nations of Europe 
are equipped to face the challenges of the 21st century: global competitiveness, global warming and 
global poverty. </p>

<p>We agree that there should be no further transfer of sovereignty or powers over the course of the 
next Parliament. We will examine the balance of the EU’s existing competences and will, in 
particular, work to limit the application of the Working Time Directive in the United Kingdom. </p>

<p>We agree that we will amend the 1972 European Communities Act so that any proposed future 
Treaty that transferred areas of power, or competences, would be subject to a referendum on that 
Treaty – a ‘referendum lock’. We will amend the 1972 European Communities Act so that the use 
of any passerelle would require primary legislation. </p>

<p>We will examine the case for a United Kingdom Sovereignty Bill to make it clear that ultimate 
authority remains with Parliament. </p>

<p>We agree that Britain will not join or prepare to join the Euro in this Parliament. 
We agree that we will strongly defend the UK’s national interests in the forthcoming EU budget 
negotiations and that the EU budget should only focus on those areas where the EU can add value. 
We agree that we will press for the European Parliament only to have one seat, in Brussels. </p>

<p>We agree that we will approach forthcoming legislation in the area of criminal justice on a case by 
case basis, with a view to maximising our country’s security, protecting Britain’s civil liberties and 
preserving the integrity of our criminal justice system. Britain will not participate in the 
establishment of any European Public Prosecutor. </p>

<h2 id="10_civil_liberties">10. Civil liberties</h2>

<p>The parties agree to implement a full programme of measures to reverse the substantial erosion of 
civil liberties under the Labour Government and roll back state intrusion.  </p>

<p>This will include: </p>

<ul>
<li>A Freedom or Great Repeal Bill. </li>
<li>The scrapping of ID card scheme, the National Identity register, the next generation of biometric passports and the Contact Point Database. </li>
<li>Outlawing the finger-printing of children at school without parental permission. </li>
<li>The extension of the scope of the Freedom of Information Act to provide greater transparency. </li>
<li>Adopting the protections of the Scottish model for the DNA database. </li>
<li>The protection of historic freedoms through the defence of trial by jury. </li>
<li>The restoration of rights to non-violent protest. </li>
<li>The review of libel laws to protect freedom of speech. </li>
<li>Safeguards against the misuse of anti-terrorism legislation. </li>
<li>Further regulation of CCTV. </li>
<li>Ending of storage of internet and email records without good reason. </li>
<li>A new mechanism to prevent the proliferation of unnecessary new criminal offences. </li>
</ul>

<h2 id="11_environment">11. Environment</h2>

<p>The parties agree to implement a full programme of measures to fulfil our joint ambitions for a low 
carbon and eco-friendly economy, including: </p>

<ul>
<li>The establishment of a smart grid and the roll-out of smart meters. </li>
<li>The full establishment of feed-in tariff systems in electricity – as well as the maintenance of banded ROCs. </li>
<li>Measures to promote a huge increase in energy from waste through anaerobic digestion. </li>
<li>The creation of a green investment bank. </li>
<li>The provision of home energy improvement paid for by the savings from lower energy bills. </li>
<li>Retention of energy performance certificates while scrapping HIPs. </li>
<li>Measures to encourage marine energy. </li>
<li>The establishment of an emissions performance standard that will prevent coal-fired power stations being built unless they are equipped with sufficient CCS to meet the emissions performance standard. </li>
<li>The establishment of a high-speed rail network. </li>
<li>The cancellation of the third runway at Heathrow. </li>
<li>The refusal of additional runways at Gatwick and Stansted. </li>
<li>The replacement of the Air Passenger Duty with a per flight duty. </li>
<li>The provision of a floor price for carbon, as well as efforts to persuade the EU to move towards full auctioning of ETS permits. </li>
<li>Measures to make the import or possession of illegal timber a criminal offence. </li>
<li>Measures to promote green spaces and wildlife corridors in order to halt the loss of habitats and restore biodiversity. </li>
<li>Mandating a national recharging network for electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles. </li>
<li>Continuation of the present Government’s proposals for public sector investment in CCS technology for four coal-fired power stations; and a specific commitment to reduce central government carbon emissions by 10 per cent within 12 months. </li>
<li>We are agreed that we would seek to increase the target for energy from renewable sources, subject to the advice of the Climate Change Committee.  </li>
</ul>

<p>Liberal Democrats have long opposed any new nuclear construction. Conservatives, by contrast, are 
committed to allowing the replacement of existing nuclear power stations provided they are subject 
to the normal planning process for major projects (under a new national planning statement) and 
provided also that they receive no public subsidy. </p>

<p>We have agreed a process that will allow Liberal Democrats to maintain their opposition to nuclear 
power while permitting the government to bring forward the national planning statement for 
ratification by Parliament so that new nuclear construction becomes possible.  </p>

<p>This process will involve: </p>

<ul>
<li>The government completing the drafting of a national planning statement and putting it before Parliament; </li>
<li>Specific agreement that a Liberal Democrat spokesman will speak against the planning statement, but that Liberal Democrat MPs will abstain; and </li>
<li>Clarity that this will not be regarded as an issue of confidence. </li>
</ul>

  </body>
</html>
